# On Exercising In Your 30s
## No more basketball for me, the MAF method, and getting in shape


I know more thirty year olds with injuries caused by lack of exercise rather than too much exercise. Lower back pain being the most common sedentary injury. Within the population of friends and associates who do exercise, I know more people who deal with significant injuries from risky activities than I do that are injury free. For some reason, when going out to  exercise, people tell themselves, if they arent getting a huge adrenaline rush, they simply are wasting their time. Overtime, the risky activities escalate until a serious injury occurs. I'm hoping to avoid that process by choosing the running plan called the ["MAF Method"](https://philmaffetone.com/method/) to get in shape. Exercise has always played a role in my life. If I don't get a workout in a day I feel guilty because I know my lack of discipline overcame my willpower. Whether a long walk, a pickup basketball game, a bicycle ride across town, a long jog, I make sure to get a good sweat in every day. As I get older, I've had to cut out injury prone exercises in exchange for the boring jog.

Ever since I was a kid, playing basketball has been my favorite form of exercise. Basketball is less boring than going for a jog. Basketball is a great way to meet new friends with a similar interest. Basketball courts are prevalent in and outdoors throughout the US. The only problem with basketball, is it is an activity with a relatively high injury risk. For me, spraining your ankles is the real risk. I've seen people get their eyes poked, tear ligaments in their knees, get concussed falling or elbowed, but ankle sprains are the most common injury.

I broke my ankle in college when an inexperienced defender undercut me while i was in the air which required three weeks before walking, 6 months before playing basketball again lightly, and a full year before I could sprint. I most recently sprained an ankle when a defender undercut me while landing from a jump shot about 3 months ago which still fully hasn't healed due to a slightly stretched ligament according to my recent annual physical visit. But I can jog on it now. If you are playing with experienced players, the risk is relatively low as basketball players know what not to do to avoid injuries. For example, if someone is jumping in the air to attempt to dunk the ball, unless you have ample time to get a clean block on the dunk attempt, it is generally agreed upon not to foul the player as doing so might lead the air-born player to lose his balance in the air causing a bad fall. The issue with choosing a high injury prone form of exercise is, especially one that you rely on opposing players to perform safely, when you are injured, you just can't really exercise for months afterwards. Basketball isn't alone in being a risky activity. I know friends who've had torn ACLs, sports hernias, concussions, broken bones, big injuries from:

* Skiing (trick park skiing)
* Cross-fit (lifting too heavy weights with bad form!)
* Yoga (trying poses to keep up with the rest of the class!)
* Rugby
* Basketball
* Cycling (Going too fast and crashing!)
* Mountain biking (risky!)

At a recent doctor visit, after a month break from exercising due to injury, despite playing basketball for 30min-1 hour a day for years, the doctor let me know that my blood showed I wasn't exercising enough and I was consuming too much sugar. Now that I'm 30, my days of playing basketball are coming to an end. I can no longer rely on recovering from injury quickly causing long periods of exercise-less sedentary unhealthy periods. I'll still play with friends who want to meet up to play, but no longer will I be showing up at parks looking for pickup games. Going forward, I'll be jogging for an hour a day with the hopes of reversing that blood test my doctor told me about, and being able to exercise on a daily basis without having to sit out for 3-4 weeks due to injury a few times a year.

I was advised by a former collegiate runner to structure my running plan around the ["MAF Method"](https://philmaffetone.com/method/). This plan basically instructs runners to run for an hour a day, while keeping their heart-rate below 180 minus their age beats for minute. This method aims to ensure the runner is able to consistently have energy to run on a daily basis (not burning themselves out on a hard run twice a week), reduce injury risk by ensuring the runner is not fatigued while running, and a simple plan to ensure runners don't get overwhelmed planning out their exercise routines. I was able to get a heart-rate monitor watch for about a 100 dollars online to make tracking your heart-rate easy while out on a jog. I am looking forward to seeing my blood results in a year, seeing my running times slowly get faster over time, and hopefully drop a few extra pounds to prevent an early death!
